## My Philosophy of Dog Training
My philosophy of dog training in large comes down to a very simple concept: association. This concept is simple yet extremely powerful and all encompassing. It is the top of the pyramid, the ultimate abstraction which has been governing and probably will continue to govern my training for as long as it is simply the best and most powerful idea around. 

The concept of association basically means that the dog will associate anything and everything that is happening NOW with everything else that is happening now. We are thus training the dog all the time even when we are not doing so consciously. If we are not training the dog then the environment does it. The dog is learning all the time - but we have the conscious power to alter the associations that the dog makes about any given situation to either encourage a certain behavior or deminish it or help the dog generalize a behavior. 

It is through association that we help the dog generalize as well. If we train a behavior in such a way that we intentionally swap out the parts of the sensory image that the dog is sensing in such a way that only the relevant parts remain then the dog learns to generalize because associations between relevant parts such as a command and a following behavior followed by a natural reinforcer is strengthened and the association between irrelevant parts of the sensory image is weakened because we swap them out for something new that has zero association to the situation from the start. 

It is also by association that the dog can learn to fear certain situations and to bite when we don't want the dog to bite. If we constantly bully the dog and take it's toys and take it's food then the dog learns that protecting it's toys and food is desirable and will snatch things and run away. If we instead create an association that with us close to the food the dog gets comfort (petting or just sitting and letting the dog eat it's bone on your lap or while laying on your feet) then the dog will not have a reason to run away and to protect it's food (of course if you try to snatch a bone any normal dog will growl and protect the resource - we should not be mad at the dog for what he is either).

Associations are also created with the use of tools that cause pain - such as electric collars (which are illegal now where I live). The reason this works is obviously because it is the fastest way to deter a behavior - the dog quickly associates the zap with whatever it is doing and will then avoid doing the behavior. The BIGGEST problem is that by the law of association the dog ALSO associates the zap with everything else which you may not even be aware of. So it is a very risky way to teach the dog - which CAN work exellently and quickly in a highly controlled environment - but would require extreme care in order to avoid creating unintentional negative associations and avoidance behaviors.

Studies done in Norway have shown that dogs that are consistently trained with electric collars show fear for their handlers and are generally more hesitant in training than dogs that are trained predominantly with positive reinforcement techniqes. I have personally never had to use an electric collar, but I would not blindly discount it's effectiveness when it comes to very limited number of cases with dogs that can be a real danger to themselves or other people and where it is necessary to quickly break down an association enough to be able to use positive reinforcement to build a better alternative behavior (which would be very very hard to do without first snapping the dog out of a negative spiral). I think that electric collars, while promoted eagerly by american trainers, are a tool that is highly overrated - kindof like using a nuclear bomb when simple negotiation would work most of the time. So my strategy of training first and foremost is about learning good associations which then turn into instinctive habits (like sitting when waiting for food). 

## Early puppy period 2-4 months
During this period I strongly believe that a puppy must be introduced to as wide variety of stimuli as possible. Exposure to stimuly teaches the puppy (with proper guidance) the correct response to such stimuli and sets the foundation for future behaviors. I strongly believe that any situation that either agitates the puppy (such as rattling sounds) or is fearful/stressful to the puppy should be made part of every day exposure and associated with good rewards such as food, petting and play. 

I have made great effort to expose Alice early to things like escalators, city walking, trains, other animals and people from as soon as she arrived in our house. She was of course terrified at first but with constant exposure her fears were replaced with curiosity. As a result of this I can focus on training her instead of dealing with unreasonable fears. 

The importance of intense exposure is probably the most important aspect of the early puppy period. It is however important to always read the dog and calm her down. If the dog is so scared that she retreats or runs away then the exercise has failed miserably. This should never be alowed to happen. Also any negative stimuli such as pain should be completely avoided and the environment should be such that it can not by itself expose the dog to pain (running into a rose bush is kindof part of growing up as a puppy but getting jammed in a subway door is extremely bad specially if little or no positive associations have been built up. 

Exposing a puppy to a wide variety of experiences early on is the only way to fortify a foundation where fear has no place at all. 

## Environment forms associations
Since the dog associates everything that is happening in the now with everything else that is happening in the now, associations can be formed between commands and actions by simply saying a command while the dog is voluntarily performing an action in order to "capture" that action and have a command for it. 

Controlling the environment is one way to either create positive or negative associations without actually being directly involved onself. For example if a dog is living on a farm with an electric fence for other animals the dog will quickly learn to stay away from the fence after being zapped a few times (note that electric fence is not the same as electric collar because here the dog has a choice to go near it or stay away). Same applies to ant nests and rose bushes. The environement is always forming associations even when we are not around. However we have the power to rearrange the environment and make it's teaching more effective. 

## Associations form or break habits
Getting positive associations early makes the dog motivated to do actions again - such as being eager to ride an escalator. So new habits - such as walking onto an escalator as though it was a stairs - can be formed. Actions done with motivation form long lasting habits which the dog eagerly does on command. 

Negative associations break habits and create instead habits of avoidance. If one really wants to deter a behavior - such as jumping on the counter - one can form a negative association. This can be done by simply holing the dog's paw in ones hand and not letting it go for a split-second. This is very uncomfortable for a dog standing on his rear feet and the dog quickly learns that getting up on the counter means that a front paw will get stuck there. So the habit of jumping up on the counter is broken. 

Of course one can teach the habit of jumping up on command as well. This way a habit that is broken can be resurrected when needed. Negative associations are very important though in order to ensure that the dog behaves even when left to itself. 

## Habits form skills
Habits repeated over time and chained with other habits form skills that can be improved upon over time. From an early puppy age I try to form habits that will later form skills (a skill is a habitual action performed with professional precision). Habits are skills that happen almost automatically. This is the aim of most training that I do with my dog - the formation of skills that are useful in every day life. 

## Puppy potty training
Potty pads is a rediculous idea because it teaches the dog to piss in the the house. It does not matter if she does it on pads, newspapers or other sort of soft absorbant stuff. It is still bad. It comes natural to the dog to not make their house filthy with poop and piss so the dog actually wants to go out. If the dog is then forced to find some place around the house to do it's business it only confuses the dog. The dog would only do that out of complete frustration and probably will not even understand the whole point of it.

A puppy should be taught from the earliest possible that one goes ouside to do the toilet business. This does require waking up every two hours in the begining but this sets fortward the right habits from the start and makes the dog completely potty trained within only a few weeks. 

## Exercise
Any dog, even a puppy, should get as much exercise as is necessary to make the dog tired and ready to rest. For every breed this would be different amount. If however the dog has bad genes from the start (in which case it should not have been bred anyway) then exercise can cause early onset of joint diseases. This is a risk of course. However it is much worse to keep the dog miserable without fulfilling its need for exercise. If there is genetic predisposition for joint diseases then it will come out soon enough anyway. So my philosophy of exercise is to teach the puppy from an early age to self regulate and rest when it is tired. How else will a puppy learn when it has had enough?

## Feeding
A dog should be taught from an early age to self regulate intake of food. This is done by simply letting the dog eat until it is not hungry any more. I strongly believe that if a dog is unable to self-regulate food intake (the old saying that a dog is the only animal that can eat until it drops dead) then it is a genetically flawed dog that should not be bred. Any sound dog race will have the ability to self regulate its food intake and not eat too much. Our job is just to make sure that all the eaten food gets converted into energy and disposed of using exercise. 

Of course the self regulation probably only applies to natural raw foods. I can see how a dog can over-eat on dry kibble because it does not represent actual nutritional value of natural food per volume. A dog that for example eats large bones can eat a bone and then not eat anything else for the whole day after. This is normal and is simply the effect of the bone taking long time to process. 

Keeping a dog so hungry that it is constantly scouting for food is just plain wrong - unless the dog is genetically flawed and should not been bred in the first place. 

## Fulfilling innate needs for play and work
This particular breed (the malinois) is bred today for police and military work - meaning they are thirsty to work with their heads, paws and teeth. All such needs have to be satisfied and directed towards desirable objects such as IPO sleeve or a bite toy. I do not believe at all in restricting the amout of play a dog gets to have as means of limiting any kind of biting behavior - on the contrary I find that indulging the dog in all of it's natural needs makes for a dog that is happy, tired and fulfilled. A working dog that is tired from work is a happy dog. 

## Focus on building sense of security
A lot of effort has to go into making the dog feel secure in situaitons where it may experience fear. For example guarding behavior (when it is serious and not just play) stems primarily from the fear of loss. The dog fears that it will lose the object that it currently has and so it protects it. This is very common and very natural. However effort must be put in to make the dog see it more like a game and not a real threat and also to make the dog feel that there is no reason to protect his food or toys from you in the first place. I do this by holding bones in my hand while my dog eats them and by playing games that include elements of the protective behaviors but are obviously just games and teach the dog sequences of events like outing on command and getting a reward instead of running away with a stolen object and not getting anything. 

